\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename geiser.info
@settitle Geiser User Manual
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual documents Geiser, an Emacs environment to hack in Scheme.

Copyright @copyright{} 2010  Jose Antonio Ortega Ruiz

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

The document was typeset with
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org/, GNU Texinfo}.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Geiser: (geiser).           Emacs environment for Scheme hacking.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Geiser User Manual
@subtitle Emacs and Scheme talk to each other
@author Jose Antonio Ortega Ruiz
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Geiser

Geiser is a collection of Emacs major and minor modes that conspire with
one or more Scheme interpreters to keep the Lisp Machine Spirit alive.
It draws inspiration (and a bit more) from environments such as Common
Lisp's Slime, Factor's FUEL, Squeak or Emacs itself, and does its best
to make Scheme hacking inside Emacs (even more) fun.

Or, to be precise, what @uref{http://hacks-galore.org/jao, i} consider
fun. Geiser is thus my humble contribution to the dynamic school of
expression, and a reaction against what i perceive as a derailment, in
modern times, of standard Scheme towards the static camp. Because i
prefer growing and healing to poking at corpses, the continuously
running Scheme interpreter takes the center of the stage in Geiser. A
bundle of Elisp shims orchestrates the dialog between the Scheme
interpreter, Emacs and, ultimately, the schemer, giving her access to
live metadata. Here's how.

@ifnothtml
@insertcopying
@end ifnothtml
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installation::
* Tutorial::
* Index::

@ifinfo
@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Modus operandi::
* Showing off::

Installation

* Must needs::
* Setting it up::
* Friends::

@end detailmenu
@end ifinfo
@end menu
@ifhtml
@html
<div class="navigation" align="right">
<a class="navlink"
href="http://savannah.nongnu.org/news/?group=geiser">News</a>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<a class="navlink"
href="http://savannah.nongnu.org/files/?group=geiser">Downloads</a>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<a class="navlink"
href="http://savannah.nongnu.org/bugs/?group=geiser">Bugs</a>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<a class="navlink"
href="http://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/geiser.git">Source</a>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<a class="navlink"
href="http://lists.nongnu.org/mailman/listinfo/geiser-users">Mailing
list</a>&nbsp;
</div>
@end html
@end ifhtml


@include intro.texi
@include install.texi
@include tutorial.texi
@include index.texi

@bye

@c geiser.texinfo ends here
