@node No hacker is an island, Index, Cheat sheet, Top
@chapter No hacker is an island
@cindex thanks
Andy Wingo, Geiser's first user, has been a continuous source of
encouragement and suggestions, and keeps improving Guile and heeding
my feature requests.

The nice thing about collaborating with Andreas Rottmann over all
these years is that he will not only make your project better with
insightful comments and prodding: he'll send you patches galore too.

Ludovic Courtès, #geiser's citizen no. 1, joined the fun after a
while, and has since then been a continuous source of encouragement,
ideas and bug reports.

Eduardo Cavazos' contagious enthusiasm has helped in many ways to keep
Geiser alive, and he's become its best evangelist in R6RS circles.

Eli Barzilay took the time to play with an early alpha and made many
valuable suggestions, besides answering all my 'how do you in PLT'
questions.

Matthew Flatt, Robby Findler and the rest of the PLT team did not only
answer my inquiries, but provided almost instant fixes to the few
issues i found.

Thanks also to the PLT and Guile communities, for showing me that
Geiser was not only possible, but a pleasure to hack on.  And to the
Slime hackers, who led the way.


@subsubheading Joining the fun

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex mailing list
@cindex gmane
For questions, praise, critique and anything else Geiser, do not
hesitate to drop an email to our list, @i{(@@ geiser-users (. nongnu
org))}: no subscription required.  Check
@uref{http://lists.nongnu.org/@/mailman/@/listinfo/@/geiser-users, the list
page} for more information or browse
@uref{http://lists.nongnu.org/@/archive/@/html/@/geiser-users/, the archives}.
The list is also accessible via @uref{http://gmane.org, Gmane} as
@url{http://dir.gmane.org/@/gmane.lisp.scheme.geiser,
gmane.lisp.scheme.geiser}.
@item
@cindex bug tracker
You can submit bug reports either to the mailing list or to
@uref{http://savannah.nongnu.org/@/bugs/?group=geiser, our bug tracker}
over at Savannah.
@item
@cindex news feed
If you only need to hear about Geiser on new releases,
@uref{http://savannah.nongnu.org/@/news/?group=geiser, the News page} and
its @uref{https://savannah.nongnu.org/@/news/atom.php?group=geiser, Atom
feed} are probably what you're looking for.
@item
@cindex IRC channel
The Freenode IRC channel @i{#geiser} is the Geiserati's meeting point in
cyberspace.
@end itemize

@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: "geiser"
@c End:
